Before optimizing our histogram
kernel even further, let's
revisit what we've learned so far.
We've just covered atomic
operations, thread scopes,
subspans, but what about our
earlier question?
Why is thread hierarchy needed
in the first place?
Let's take another look at
thread block synchronization,
which is only available between
threads of a given thread block.
This makes different groups
of thread not equally capable,
hence introducing non-uniformity
in thread grouping and thread
hierarchy as a result.
But are there any other resources
that are only accessible within
certain groups of threads?
To find out, let's examine
the GPU's architecture.
GPUs are composed of uniform
building blocks called streaming
multiprocessors, or SMs.
A single GPU can contain
hundreds of them.
Each SM has a lot of cores,
but also local L1 cache.
The main GPU memory lives
outside these SMs, which is
why we call it global memory.
Some features, like thread
block synchronization, are
built into the SM hardware.
To use these SM-specific
features, thread blocks
always run entirely on a single SM.
Let's think about how our histogram
kernel maps to this hardware.
Each thread block runs on
one SM, and block histograms
are stored in global memory.
Then each thread issues atomics
into its block private histogram,
which likely go into L2, which
is slower cache memory shared
globally across all SMs.
That's not very efficient
because we don't actually need
to keep Keep these block histograms
around once the kernel finishes.
They're just temporary storage.
Meanwhile, the L1 cache sits
right there on the SM.
If we could allocate the block
histogram in L1 directly,
we'd avoid wasting space
in global memory.
Besides that, L1 cache
is physically closer than
global memory, so we'd
likely improve performance.
Fortunately, we
can do exactly that.
CUDA provides a software-defended
cache that's called shared memory.
Shared memory is only accessible
within a given thread block
and is co-located with L1.
To allocate shared memory,
we simply add the shared
specifier to a variable.
In this example, we declare an
array of four integers as shared.
From within a thread block,
you can read and write to
this array as you normally would.
In this example, each thread
writes its own index into the
corresponding element of the array.
Just keep potential data races
in mind and use sync threads so
that every thread finishes writing
before any thread reads the data.
To emphasize that this shared
array is indeed shared across
all threads in a block, we
have the first thread print
out every value stored in it.
The first thread sees the updates
from all other threads, and
in this case, it prints 0, 1, 2, 3.
In the exercise for this section,
you'll allocate the block
histogram in shared memory
instead of in global memory.